---
layout: post
title: SQL Leetcode 597/602 Friend Request
date: 2020-04-22
tags: [SQL]
---

### 597. Overall Acceptance Rate ###

In social network like Facebook or Twitter, people send friend requests and
accept others’ requests as well. Now given two tables as below:

**Table**: friend_request

| sender_id | send_to_id |  request_date |
|-----------|------------|---------------|
| 1         |  2         |   2016-06-01  |
| 1         |  3         |   2016-06-01  |
| 1         |  4         |   2016-06-01  |
| 2         |  3         |   2016-06-02  |
| 3         |  4         |   2016-06-09  |

**Table**: request_accepted

| requester_id | accepter_id |  request_date |
|--------------|-------------|---------------|
| 1            |  2          |   2016-06-03  |
| 1            |  3          |   2016-06-08  |
| 2            |  3          |   2016-06-08  |
| 3            |  4          |   2016-06-09  |
| 3            |  4          |   2016-06-10  |


Write a query to find the overall acceptance rate of requests rounded to **2 decimals**,
which is the number of acceptance divide the number of requests.
For the sample data above, your query should return the following result.

| accept_rate |
|-------------|
|      0.80   |

#### Analysis ####
To solve this problem, we need:
* accept_rate = number of acceptance/ number of requests
* rounded to 2 decimals

Break this problem into 4 steps:
* Get the unique number of requests -> unique (sender_id, send_to_id) pair
* Get the unique number of acceptance -> unique (requester_id, accepter_id) pair
* Calculate the accept rate and rounded to 2 decimals
* Add IFNULL for edge case

#### Solution ####
{% highlight mysql %}
SELECT
ROUND(
  IFNULL(
  (SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(requester_id, accepter_id))
   FROM friend_request)
  /
  (SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(sender_id, send_to_id))
   FROM request_accepted)
   ,0)
,2)AS accept_rate
{% endhighlight %}

***

### 602. Who Has the Most Friends ###

Table **request_accepted** holds the data of friend acceptance.

| requester_id | accepter_id |  request_date |
|--------------|-------------|---------------|
| 1            |  2          |   2016-06-03  |
| 1            |  3          |   2016-06-08  |
| 2            |  3          |   2016-06-08  |
| 3            |  4          |   2016-06-09  |

Write a query to find the the people who has most friends and the most friends number under the following rules:

* It is guaranteed there is only 1 people having the most friends.
* The friend request could only been accepted once, which mean there is no multiple records with the same requester_id and accepter_id value.

For the sample data above, the result is:

| id | num |  
|----|-----|
| 3  |  3  |  

#### Analysis ####
The table is slightly different compared to the first question. Based on tule 2,
there is no multiple records with the same requester_id and accepter_id value.

We break this problem into 2 steps:
* Find the number of friends for each person: id, num_friends
* Find the person with the most number of friends

The second step is easy to do, so let's take a look at the first one.
Using **id 3** as example: we find id 3 has friend 4, when id 3 acting as a requester.
id 3 also has friend 1 and 2 when acting as a accepter.  

So, we can have the following observation:
* The number of friend of each person = The number of occurrences of that person in the table
In order to do that, we want to put column **requester_id** and column **accepter_id** into one column
then compute the count.

#### Solution ####
{% highlight sql %}
SELECT ids AS id, count AS num
FROM
  (
  SELECT ids, COUNT(*) AS count
  FROM
    (
    SELECT requester_id AS ids FROM request_accepted
    UNION ALL
    SELECT accepter_id AS ids FROM request_accepted
    ) AS T1
  GROUP BY ids) AS T2
ORDER BY cnt DESC
LIMIT 1;
{% endhighlight %}

### Highlights ###
* UNION ALL
* GROUP BY
